---
talk: Improving CSS Architecture
sub: with Cascade Layers, Container Queries, & Scope
venue: TPAC 2021
date: 2021-10-01
script: |
  I want to quickly show you
  three CSS features that we're working on,
  to help teams manage the overall architecture of their CSS.
slides:

- title: CSS **Selectors** & **Specificity**
  script: |
    First, we wanted to address some of the pain points
    around selectors and specificity.

- md: |
    - `*` **(universal/weak)**
    - `type`
    - `.class` & `[attr]`
    - `#ID`s **(single-use/strong)**
  caption: |
    [heuristic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heuristic):
    a practical assumption
    that approximates the desired goal
  script: |
    Specificity is based on the assumption
    that generic selectors are also lower priority,
    and more narrowly targeted selectors are higher priority.

- from: itcss
  use: layers
  script: |
    This is a rough approximation
    of the layers in our code --
    But it's not perfect.

- from: itcss
  use: main
  script: |
    And authors don't have much direct control.
    The act of layering is intertwined
    with the need to select elements.

# Layers ----------------
- section: |
    Cascade **Layers**
  caption: |
    [Working Draft](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-cascade-5/)
  script: |
    Cascade Layers are designed to give authors more direct control,
    to describe our own custom layers of the cascade.

- css: |
    @layer default {
      audio[controls] { display: block; }
      [hidden] { display: none !important; }
    }
  script: |
    We can define a layer,
    give it a name,
    and add styles to it
    using either the at-layer rule --

- css: |
    @import url(headings.css) layer(default);

    @layer default { /* same "default" layer */ }
  script: |
    Or by adding a layer function to imports, or both.

- css: |
    /* unlayered styles (lowest) */
    @layer default { /* higher */ }
    @layer theme { /* even higher */ }
    @layer components { /* highest */ }
  script: |
    Layers stack in the order they were first defined,
    with un-layered styles at the bottom,
    and the last layer at the top.
    Selectors inside the `components` layer here,
    will take priority over all the other layers.

- css: |
    @layer default { /* … */ }
    @layer theme { /* … */ }

    /* still a lower layer than "theme" styles */
    @layer default { /* … */ }
  script: |
    But we don't need to keep all our layered styles in that same order.
    The layer priority is based on when a layer name _first appears_.

- css: |
    @layer default;
    @layer theme, components, utilities;

    @layer default {
      * { box-sizing: border-box; }
    }
  script: |
    So we can even establish our desired layer order up-front,
    by using the layer rule without any styles --
    just a layer name or list of names.
    Once they're established,
    we can add to those layers in any order,
    and our code will slot into place.

- css: |
    @layer tools {
      @layer theme {
        /* tools.theme */
      }
    }

    @layer tools.theme { /* tools.theme */ }

  script: |
    We can also nest layers as needed --
    and reference nested layers directly with a dot notation.

- css: |
    @layer { /* anonymous */ }

  script: |
    Or create anonymous layers
    that are maintained in a single location.

- title: |
    **Working Draft** Specification
  sub: |
    www.w3.org/TR/css-cascade-5/
  script: |
    This spec is currently a Working Draft,
    and has become fairly stable.

- title: |
    Existing **Feature Flags**
  md: |
    - **Firefox Nightly**: \
      » `layout.css.cascade-layers.enabled` feature flag
    - **Chrome Canary**: \
      » `--enable-blink-features=CSSCascadeLayers` run-time flag
  caption: |
    [WebKit Issue](https://bugs.webkit.org/show_bug.cgi?id=220779)
  script: |
    Both Firefox and Chrome already have prototypes
    available behind flags,
    and there's also been significant progress
    on the Webkit issue.

# Scope ----------------
- section: |
    **Scoped** Styles
  script: |
    The next feature is also about how selectors work.
    With "scope",
    we're trying to address two closely related issues
    that come up regularly,
    and drive people to use tools & conventions
    like BEM syntax or CSS-in-JS.

- pre: 1. Avoid
  title: |
    **Naming** Conflicts
  sub: (across _large teams_ & _projects_)
  script: |
    The first goal is to avoid
    naming conflicts as our projects grow.

- pre: 2. By
  title: Expressing **Membership**
  sub: (through _lower boundaries_ & _proximity_)
  script: |
    Which we can solve
    by focusing on our second goal:
    expressing "membership" or "ownership"
    in our selectors.

- css: |
    .title { /* global */ }
    .post .title { /* nested */ }
  caption: |
    _Membership_ is distinct from _ancestry_
  script: |
    While nested selectors
    might seem like a way to
    express membership --
    in this case
    a title that is inside a post --

- css: |
    .title { /* global */ }
    .post .title { /* nested */ }

    .post__title { /* BEM */ }
  caption: |
    _Membership_ is distinct from _ancestry_
  script: |
    That's not quite the same thing
    as _a post-title_.
    The first one only describes a nested structure,
    but the second describes
    a more clear membership in a component pattern.
    Not _all the titles in a post_,
    just the title that _belongs to_ the post.

- img: csswg/components.jpg
  alt: wireframe of a site, with multiple nested components
  fit: contain
  background: '#e5e5e5'
  caption: |
    A "donut scope" with
    _lower boundaries_
    similar to shadow-DOM `slots`
  script: |
    Another way to think about this is
    to say that some components
    have lower boundaries.
    The component itself is a "donut"
    with a slot in the middle for content.
    We should be able to style these donut compontents,
    without worrying that we might accidentally
    style _everything inside_ them by mistake.

- img: csswg/widget.jpg
  fit: contain
  alt: |
    Diagram shows a widget with solid boundaries,
    which cannot be penetrated
    in either direction
    (global styles can't get in, widget styles can't get out)
  background: white
  caption: |
    **Encapsulation**
    is designed for _isolated DOM widgets_
  script: |
    There are some similarities
    between scope and shadow-DOM encapsulation.

    But Shadow boundaries are defined in the DOM,
    so that each element has a single scope,
    and styles are strongly isolated from getting in or out.
    They never allowed to overlap at all.

- img: csswg/scoped.jpg
  alt: |
    Diagram shows a component with porous boundaries,
    all styles can penetrate, or establish their own lower boundaries
  fit: contain
  background: white
  caption: |
    **Scope**
    is designed for _a unified system_
  script: |
    Where scopes are defined entirely in CSS --
    more fluid,
    able to overlap,
    and integrate more smoothly
    with global design systems.

- css: |
    @scope (.media) to (.content) {
      img { /* only images that are "in scope" */ }
    }
  caption: |
    [CSSWG Scope Issue](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/5809)
  script: |
    The current proposal uses an at-scope rule,
    which accepts both a scope-root selector
    (in this case `media`)
    and a lower-boundary selector
    (in this case `content`).
    Any selectors inside the at-rule
    only match elements _between_ a matched
    root element and any lower-boundary descendants.

- css: |
    @scope ([data-theme=light]) {
      a { color: purple; }
    }
    @scope ([data-theme=dark]) {
      a { color: plum; }
    }
  script: |
    We're also considering how
    scope _proximity_ might become part of the cascade.
    When two styles have the same specificity
    we could give priority to the "closer" scope-root
    before falling back to source-order.

- css: |
    @scope (.media) to (.content) {
      img { border: red; }
    }

    /* as a selector, without proximity rules? */
    img:in(.media / .content) { border: red; }
  script: |
    There has also been talk about adding
    some form of lower-boundary or donut selector syntax,
    to write more targeted selectors
    without the at-rule or proximity weighting.

- title: |
    **Editor's Draft** Specification
  sub: |
    https://drafts.csswg.org/css-contain-3/
  script: |
    This is still in very early design discussions,
    but we're happy to get feedback.

# Container Queries ----------------
- section: |
    **Container** Queries
  script: |
    And that brings us to Container Queries --
    one of the most requested features
    over the last decade.

- pen: media-v-container
  script: |
    - Media queries let us respond to viewport
    - Same element in multiple containers,
      viewport isn't useful
    - Respond to containers instead

- title: Layout **Loops**
  sub: CSS _Context_ vs _Content_
  script: |
    But this type of query could lead to an infinite layout loop.

- css: |
    .container {
      contain: size layout style;
    }
  script: |
    So the first thing we need to do
    is define our containers --
    any element the we want to query --
    and turn off content-based sizing
    on those elements.

    We can do something similar with the `contain` property,
    but the current options are a little too heavy-handed.

- css: |
    .container {
      contain: inline-size;
    }
  caption: |
    See the
    [Issues with Single-Axis Containment](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/6426)
  script: |
    We usually want to contain only the `width` of an element,
    or the inline-dimension,
    and allow the `height` or block dimension to grow and shrink
    with the content.
    This isn't entirely solved, yet,
    but we have a prototype,
    and we're confident that there's a path forward.

- css: |
    .sidebar, main, .grid-item {
      container-type: inline-size;
    }
  caption: |
    [CSSWG discussion of new syntax](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/6174)
  script: |
    But authors wont set that containment directly.
    Instead, we'll define the type of container we want --
    _what dimensions we need to query_ --

- css: |
    @container (min-width: 40em) {
      .card { /* ... */ }
      h2 { /* ... */ }
    }
  caption: |
    Each element queries the
    _nearest ancestor container_
  script: |
    And then any element can query the container it is in --
    its nearest ancestor that's been defined as a container.
    This container-query looks exactly like a media-query,
    but with at-container instead of at-media.

- css: |
    .sidebar {
      container-type: inline-size;
      container-name: sidebar;
    }

    @container sidebar (width > 30em) {
      .container { padding: 2em; }
    }
  caption: |
    [CSSWG issue for named containers](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/6176)
  script: |
    And if you don't want to rely on the nearest container,
    you can also give containers names,
    and only query containers with a specific name.

- css: |
    .sidebar { container-type: inline-size; }

    @container type(inline-size) (width > 30em) {
      .container { padding: 2em; }
    }
  caption: |
    [CSSWG issue for type queries](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/6393)
  script: |
    Or only query a specific container type.

- pre:
    Chrome Canary **Prototype**
  sub: |
    `chrome://flags/` » `Enable CSS Container Queries`
  script: |
    Chrome Canary already has a prototype,
    and you can start playing with it
    behind a feature flag.

- pen: cq-books
  script: |
    Max Böck has created this bookstore demo
    with self-contained web components.
    Each host element is a container,
    and everything inside the component
    adjusts based on available size.

- pre: More to do...
  title: Container **Units**
  sub: |
    `qw` | `qh` | `qi` | `qb` | `qmin` | `qmax`
  caption: |
    [CSSWG issue for container units](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/5888)
  script: |
    We're also working on container-relative units,
    similar to vw, vh, vmin, vmax,
    but a percentage of the container size
    rather than the viewport.

- pen: Container Units
  id: jOwmOZE
  user: scottkellum
  script: |
    These are also supported in
    the Chrome Canary prototype.
    Here's a demo from Scott Kellum
    showing query units in action.

- css: |
    @container property(--colors == invert) { … }
  caption: |
    [CSSWG issue for style queries](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/6396)
  script: |
    We're also working on queries
    that aren't about the container size.
    The exact syntax is not established yet,
    but we might be able to query the actual value
    of a property --

- css: |
    @container state(is-stuck) { … }
  caption: |
    [CSSWG issue for state queries](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/6402)
  script: |
    Or the current state of a container.
    Is it position-sticky, and currently in a "stuck" state?

- title: |
    **Editor's Draft** Specification
  sub: |
    https://drafts.csswg.org/css-contain-3/
  script: |
    This is an editor's draft,
    just waiting on the details of single-axis containment
    before we move it to First Public Working Draft,
    and start looking for more implementations.

# outro

- toc: true
  script: |
    All of these features are designed to work together,
    building on the existing features of CSS.
    we're excited to see what people build with these new tools,
    and always eager to get feedback.
